Welcome back everyone to this lecture on visualizing time series in this lecture we're going to go through
a few key points of creating nice time series visualization and how you can edit your time series X-ists
using Map plot lips capabilities.
Let's open up a new Jupiter notebook and get started.
OK here I am in the Jupiter notebook and going to import Pandurs as P-T going to import map plot lim
the PI plot.
As POPC and then I'm going to say map plot live in line and later on we're going to show you a way to
make this notebook interactive or at least a visualisations.
I have some McDonald's stock data for you as a McDonald's c v.
Let's go ahead and read that in we'll say panderers or PD that read CXXVI the McDonald's let's see every
file and then we'll say in the next column is equal to dates.
And we're going to ask States to be true.
Once you've done that you should notice that there's two columns here.
We just check out the head of the data frame there is just that close.
And it just adds value now when you see a data frame like this where you have many column sharing the
same date time index may be very tempting just to do something like this say Mactan and then plot.
But unfortunately if you're Y-axis on a totally different skill for both columns it's not going to work
very well.
So notice here that the adjusted volume is on a completely different scale than it just that close.
You want to avoid doing things like this unless all your columns are relatively around the same scale.
Instead what you're going to do usually is just call a series such as just call it just to close.
And now we see a plot that is actually interpretable.
So then we do the same thing with adjusted volume will say Mactan adjusted volume plus that we'll see
this plot where it's actually showing how much volume is traded per day and we can see different spikes
here.
And then on that spike you can then realize hey something interesting happened this day.
Let me go check it out.
And if you want more clarity on this plot you can in the editing figure size by passing and Fig size
here and then you could say something like.
Told by 4 stretch out a little bit.
See those spikes even clear.
So what I want to now show you is how you can format this plot even further.
And one of the things you can do is set X limits and y limits.
So let's say if I check out McDonald's the adjusted clothes column and I plot that out.
I have some kind of interesting period.
Let's just make up something like 2007 is kind of interesting to me.
So we're going to do is say plot and I can set the X limit in sight of this to be either a tuple or
a list just needs to be an iterable sequence of two items.
And then I pasan let's say 2007 0 1 0 1 so that's 2007 January 1st and then comma I pass in whatever
the next time stamp I want to see is 2009 let's say 0 1 0 1.
So when I run that I see now I've set the limit to go from January 2007 to January 2009.
Unfortunately when you do this it will adjust the Y limit automatically.
It will keep the wildmen at the same Wylma it shows for the entire data set when you plotted it.
So usually when you say Excellent have to also sit while in it.
So in this case we can set a limit.
And notice I can pass in a tuple a list for this and we'll just go let's say from 0 to no let's say
50 and I will see a more reasonable way.
Let me here.
And if you wanted to you could then raise the y element to something like 20 to 50 if you really want
to see the behavior there.
So continuing along if we just kind of copy and paste this code.
So McDonald's is just that close plot.
And let's actually do the same limits here so everything's the same.
You can set lifestyle and line color.
So the easy ways to do that is for lifestyle just.
LS That's I'm at lib.
Quick code make it do something like that dash line if you really want it.
And then if you want to set the color you could set something like see equal to read the whole set to
be read.
We really won't be changing color and style that often throughout the course will basically just usually
use a default panderers that will be enough for us.
But in case you ever feel the need to you have all the capabilities mapped lib inside the stopped plot
call.
Now let's really talk about one of the important things when dealing with time series data.
The time series is pretty much always going to be on the x axis and if the x axis that's automatically
formatted for us doesn't work for you you're going to need to use map plus lives capabilities with the
map published dates module or sub library in order to actually work with this.
So one of the other here is I'm going to import that plot live dates as
you can also say from spotlit import dates.
And then when I go into is just going to passen the exact same plot we did last time.
And here it is.
And let's just make this limit doesn't really matter.
We can make it zero cetera.
So let's pretend that you're not satisfied with this automated X ticks on the x axis you actually want
it to show something like daily data or daily ticks.
Or maybe you want to show both daily ticks and monthly ticks or weekly ticks etc. How can you actually
set these X ticks using that plot lib.
Well to do that you'll need to grab the index that you're concerned with so you can say id x is equal
to make Dawn.
And if you're dealing with your entire data frame here you would just say McDonogh that index.
And then what you would end up having now is this date time index.
Since we're only concerned if a portion are at data we're going to do is say Alosi and we'll pass and
the dates that we're just messing around with.
In fact let's make it even smaller we'll just say Girk grab a few months from this 2007 to let's say
dash 0 5 0 1 and No here I mean isn't colon because this is essentially a slice operation slicing that
out of the index and then called the index actually get the index because if you don't call the index
Ill just turn that actual part of the data frame.
So now I run this I get back from 2007 January to 2007.
May for the fifth month then we're also going to do is set our stock data.
So I'm going to create a new variable called stock and that's going to be equal to McDonald's thought
Alosi at that same time series will just copy and paste this those same locations.
And I'm just worried about just that close.
So what I'm going to do is say here adjusted close call call it off of that.
So now take a look at my stock data.
It should be an asshole time serious here from those dates with just a close price.
OK now let's slowly plot this out using Map plot lib and it will show you things that you can add onto
this to fix things.
X-Tex access.
So if I wanted to plot this from that plot live I would end up doing maybe say something like Fig x
is equal to peel t the subplots and then off of this axis I'm going to call not just plot.
I'm going to say plot underscore date and that's basically kind of special method beyond just plotting.
Often access to let my public know hey I'm not just dealing with any sort of array here.
This is actually date time index information which makes map plot lib.
Understand that you can call things like a year week day off of it.
So I get a pass in the index and then going to pasand stock time series and if you just run this by
itself you'll get back a plot that looks like this.
Essentially a scatterplot.
And that's not exactly what we want we don't want these markers here.
So a third argument just sort of play a basic map Hotlips tiling I can add a dash here and then this
will create a line now if you have errors like this where stuff is overlapping one thing you can try
to do is say peel tea tightly.
However often for Titely that usually concerned with more than one plot if you run this you still won't
get enough of a fix.
You'll still have overlapping material.
So the way to fix the overlap with date times is with a simple command you just say Fig.
So off your figure object you call Otto FM t underscore X date and you just start typing auto hit tab
and will auto complete this for you and then just close Princie sexually execute that method and what
it's going to end up doing it's going to automatically format.
That's what this FMC stands for.
Automatically format the x axis and here you can see it ends up twisting them in a way that makes everything
look a lot nicer.
All right let's see you wanted to actually add in grid lines so this will that's actually quite easy.
All you need to do is add them to the access so you can say X dot and then we can call the y axis on
this say grid is true.
And then we get those grid lines on the y axis if you want them on the x axis you can say x x axis grid
and then pass that to be true.
And there's more parameters as we saw earlier when discussing that plot lib.
You can make these dasht grids etc a much darker whiter whatever you really want it can do for you.
However we're kind of concerned about or interested in editing these X-Tex like if you only want the
months I don't want this much of a detailed information how would I actually do that.
There's basically two steps for it.
One is to set the major or minor locator and then the second step is to set the major or minor formatter
so it's location and then formatting.
So let's show you those two steps.
I'm going to get rid of the grid lines for this.
It's clear.
So the first step is location or locating so you grab your access and then we're going to say grab x
axis off of that and then we're going to say set underscore major locator and then in this major locator
what you end up doing is say pasand dates.
And you'll notice they has a couple of locators.
If you keep scrolling down maybe type.
Oh you'll see there's a month locator.
If you start typing week you'll notice there's a weekday locator.
So there's various locators you can use.
And we'll just use the month locators an example and then we'll just close print Cesaire and call it.
So I'll pass that in and then once you've located what you want off date in this case it's locating
months.
You can specify how you actually want to format it.
So we'll do the following.
We'll say x x axis set major and or say set major formatter and then we'll say dates thoughts and then
you're going to call it formatter.
That's pretty much always going to be the same regardless of what you're actually locating month or
week day.
Cetera.
And we're going to pass and here is a string indicating how you actually want to format the time series
for the time series data that is with each x Tich actually going to look like when you print it out.
So the way you do that is you just passen the string formatting for a time so you can say something
like.
Percent sign B cash.
Percent sign.
Let's just say why.
You'll run that and what's going to happen is it's going to locate the months.
What it does is it sets the ticks every month and then for the formatting it just formats what the data
output should look like.
So here we just use the special percent site codes for time and you can check out the resource links
for all the codes you can do pretty much anything day month for month name.
So if we change it to a capital B and run this you can see it get the full month name etc. So there's
a bunch of special codes here.
They can check out the resource link for all of them.
Essentially just gives you a free range of format.
However you want.
So if I add in a bunch more dashes there's a limit to how useful this is.
But I can run this and I can see all the dashes etc..
Now what's interesting here is let's just go back to kind of a lowercase b dash if I can add in new
lines and adding in those new lines pushes the actual dates past the ticks of fat in a couple of new
lines here.
I can really push them out.
And what that does is it gives me space to input a minor set of axes and we're going to do the exact
same thing locating and then forgot to comment out the stat formatting.
So we're going to do locating and formatting.
Not for the major axis but now we're going to do for the minor So still the x axis.
But now it's going to be minor which means it's going to be closer.
So it's giving ourselves a little gap here and we can fill that in.
So let's do that.
We will say x x axis and then I'm going to set the minor and whoops we actually first want to locate
this so I'll say locator and then for this one will they will say they locator.
So it's going to find the weekdays from that series in their state time index and then we're going to
say X-axis again and then we're going to set the minor formatter so let's format this.
We'll call called data the formatter and how you can basically use whatever you want lushest passen
percent saying the run that you'll notice it gives you back the actual day for the second 9 16 etc..
Now question you might be having is actual day of the week is this is Monday a Tuesday Thursday ET cetera.
Well if we replace this percent 70 percent a year let us get a bunch of Tuesdays out.
So all of these are Tuesdays.
So you can do CICA week they located the shift tab here you can say by weekday as an argument and what
by weekday those is it actually sets what the weekday you're concerned with is.
So one is Tuesday meaning zero is Monday the start of the week.
So if you run this again then you get pure Mondays.
If you run three you get Thursdays up to 6 which is then Sundays.
So usually what you wouldn't do is just say percent I would say present sign D and you would get the
actual date so you can choose if you want the Sundays to be represented or the Mondays etc..
Now as quick no this is not super common to both major locater major formatter minor locator and minor
formatter unless you have a very specific story to tell and want to format your data in a very specific
way.
Usually we're just going to do whatever Panas this automatically and that will be fine for us.
We don't have to worry about setting major locaters any major formatters we'll just say essentially
what we do all the way up here will pretty much always just say something like D column and then plot
it and if we really need to we'll do a couple of things like at finger size mess around X limits y limits
etc. this that we discussed on here with the major locater major formatter we really won't do that again
in the course but in case you ever need to for some publication purpose or want to make an image it
is available for you.
Now the last thing I want to discuss is this nice little trick they can use only with the Jupiter notebook
to kind of make these a little more interactive right now they're just static for us.
Let's go ahead and see if we can make them interactive in order to do this what you'll need to do is
restart the kernel Ill say hey do you want to restart the kernel.
Go ahead and say restart and then change that putting it in line to map lib notebook and then run that
let it run.
Make sure you research the kernel because if you called Matt Cutlip in line call him at public know
might cause some errors so you need to restart the kernel.
So once you called my lab notebook instead of putting it in line we're going to read in that CACP file
again.
Show the head again and then I'm going to plot it just that close column and you'll notice my plot looks
a little different.
In fact I now have different capabilities that are interactive plugin to zoom out just a little bit
so we can see as plot so zooming out I can see I have home reset the original view I have back to previous
view for the next view.
I have this pan.
So there's a lot and it's kind of pan around.
You can see how the axis are interactively changing and you can see I also have Zoom's rectangle.
So if I actually wanted to focus in on a particular thing maybe I want to focus in on this little slump
right here.
I can zoom in.
Check it out and you notice that as a hover metal cursor I have the actual x value that I'm looking
at and the y value and then I can keep zooming in.
Checking stuff out etc. seeing the grid lines or whatever you really are concernedly if you want to
see the original view you go back to home and there's little power button here so it stops interaction
and then it just goes back to a static plot.
If you want to see the plot again interactively you have to call it again.
OK.
So that can only be available right now with the Jupiter notebook.
Hopefully in the future they can expand on that.
But essentially right now Sesi magical or not magical.
It's a magic.
Jupiter come in but it feels magical because of how cool it is and it can also expand and contract the
size of this thing.
All right.
Hope you enjoyed that and I hope you make use of it.
We won't be doing this sort of interactive stuff that often because basically static plots are going
to be enough for us but that's a nice little tool for you to explore and you base it on how to learn
anything new.
All you had to do was restart your kernel and then this set of same.
I live in Lyon say mapa lib notebook.
All right thanks everyone and I'll see at the next lecture.